---
layout: post
title:  "lab4"
category: "canhaplabs"
---

# Lab 4: Controlled actuation using PID

## 1. Run the code and try out the P controller

### How does it feel?

The first time I increased the gain, my cat and I both jumped; I hadn't been holding onto the Haply and we were both unprepared for the end effector to leap towards the middle of the metal base and begin loudly rattling. After quickly grabbing the end effector, I felt it tugging my hand towards the target position. 

I am able to override the force, but the force is always present unless I allow the end effector to reach the target. The further I move the end effector away from the target, the more force I feel pulling my hand back to the target (up to a point). If I provide counter-force to slow down the end effector, it smoothly reaches the target; however, if I allow it to go as fast as it wants to, it will overshoot the target and rapidly oscillate with a rattling noise. With a small enough P value, I can get the end effector to stop oscillating by manually placing it on the target position, but without interference, it usually continues to oscillate indefinitely.

### What happens when you change the target position?

When I change the target position, the end effector immediately changes course to the newly defined target.

### What does changing the P parameter do?

Changing the P parameter changes the sensitivity of the controller. The higher the P, the more sensitive the controller is to not being at the target position.

### Do you notice any problems?

The main problem I notice is that the higher the P and the more sensitive the controller, the more jittery the end effector feels when it is close to the target. Any P value higher than ≈ 0.50 and the end effector refuses to stabilize. Because there will always be at least a small amount of error, there needs to be some dampening on the controller when it gets close to the target position for a smooth experience.

Also, when I pull the end effector far away underneath target position even with a small P value, the end effector starts to rapidly oscillate and loudly vibrate. I think this phenomenon happens because the direction the controller is pulling in changes rapidly.

## 2. Add the D component to your controller.

### How does this change the behavior of the Haply?

Adding the D component helps the end effector to more consistently reach the target position. When I guide the end effector away from the target position and let go, it will now snap back to the target and, though it overshoots a few times, it will not oscillate indefinitely any more.

### Are there any problems?

When I change the target position, even with the added D value, the controller will still rapidly oscillate and loudly vibrate.

Also sometimes the controller will break and I need to reset the device/restart the program.

## 3. Add the I component to your controller.

### How does this change the behavior of the Haply?

The Haply now seems to behave more erratically. When I rapidly move the end effector around, the force does not feel like it is a consistent force towards the target any more. With the added I value, sometimes it feels as if there is a significant amount of force when I move the end effector, and sometimes it feels as if there is almost none. 

Also, when I change the target position, sometimes the end effector will snap to the proper position, sometimes it will stop at a different position, and sometimes it will rapidly oscillate around the target position.

### Can you create a stable system that reaches the target?

These values for me seem to create a relatively stable system:

> P ≈ 0.19
>
> I ≈ 0.06
>
> D ≈ 0.84

Note: I found that I have to gently keep my hand on the end effector when I change the target position, otherwise the Haply moves too fast and breaks!

I also found it tricky to tune the PID controller without seeing a graph of the target vs. actual position of the end effector. I used [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uXnDwojRb1g&t=263s) that Preeti posted as a reference, but without the visual graph as feedback, I had to make my best guesses as to what was happening from the haptic feedback and the visual of the target position vs. end effector position.

## 4. Implement path tracking, specifically, replace the random position by a position following a track over time.

### What happens when you hold the handle?

When I hold the handle, the end effector feels like it moves smoothly along the track. When it hits an end point, it feels like it hits a wall and smoothly changes course. When I change the position of the target, the end effector smoothly snaps to the new starting position and begins following its new path.

Source code can be found [here](https://github.com/linneakirby/canhaplabs/tree/main/lab4).

### How is it affected by the PID parameters?

With just a P controller, the end effector moves somewhat jerkily at low values, and becomes jittery at high values. Furthermore, when I change the start position of the track, the end effector overshoots and oscillates noisily several times before stabilizing (at low P values).

With a PD controller, the end effector moves somewhat smoother, though it still jerks and oscillates when I create a new random starting position for the track. The oscillation now happens on only part of the track and is at a quicker frequency.

With a PID controller, the end effector moves smoothly and snaps to the new starting position when I randomize the track.

## 5. Play with the controller update rates, and with introducing delays.

### How does this change the system?

Changing these values makes the end effector act erratically again and requires that I retune the PID controller.

### What happens if you sample faster or slower?

If I sample slower, the feedback is less smooth and the visual display is not smooth. Furthermore, there is a noticeable display between randomizing the starting position of the track and when the end effector snaps to it.

If I sample faster, the visual display is much smoother, but the Haply acts more erratically and the PID controller seems like it needs to be retuned. However, if I stabilize it with my hand, it feels like it wants to move significantly smoother.

### What happens if it's random?

If it's random, it destabilizes the PID controller (especially if it randomly becomes a higher value) and the Haply begins to behave erratically even though the path trajectory has not changed.

