---
layout: post
title:  "lab2"
category: "canhaplabs"
---

# Lab 2: Intro to Haply

### [Home Improvisation](http://www.homeimprovisation.com/)

I enjoy both jazz and assembling Ikea furniture, so I had a blast [putting the Haply together](https://2diy.haply.co/). I could tell right away that the tool provided was not going to cut it torque-wise, but fortunately I was able to find the right size screwdriver (a weird star-shaped T6) in my partner's toolbox.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/lab2/screwdriver.jpg" alt="A Craftsman screwdriver with several interchangeable screw tips." caption="_The screwdriver in question. ★_" %}

I had a small mishap where I accidentally stripped the screw holes of the pieces keeping the right arm of the Haply together, but my partner had the great idea of using a screw of the same diameter as the holes in the Haply arm as a quick fix. It works well enough for now but the nut does have a tendency to come loose, so I may need to brainstorm a more permanent fix later.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/lab2/quick-fix.jpg" alt="Close up of the Haply arm held together by a screw and nut." caption="_My partner's quick fix._" %}

### "Hello Wall!"

Onto my least favorite part: getting the software working. The instructions on the official Haply website were minimal, so I got stuck a few times in my attempts to get the basic "Hello Wall!" program working.

#### Problem 1: What board is this anyway?

My first problem was figuring out what board to select as I set up the Arduino program. The board on the Haply said "Haply M0", but after some trial and error (and asking [Sri](https://sites.google.com/view/sricanhaplab/lab-2) for help) I figured out the correct board to select: “Arduino Zero (Native USB Port).”

#### Problem 2: I flashed the Haply, but I'm not feeling any feedback?

My second problem was a strange one: after loading the most basic Processing program (and blasting through a small roadblock where I realized I had to explicitly state in the code which port to use) I still wasn't receiving any haptic feedback.

Like every good scientist, I panicked upon such unexpected results and swiftly took to the Discord channel.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/lab2/help-me.png" alt="My panicked conversation in the Discord." caption="_My panicked conversation in the Discord with Sri and [Unma](https://unmadesai.medium.com/canhaptics-lab-2-intro-to-haply-441cea47cf66)._" %}

Despite being plugged into both the computer and a wall outlet, the Haply refused to produce any haptic feedback until I also plugged my laptop into a wall outlet. 

Finally: success!

### Creating a haptic maze loader

I admit, I may have gone a bit overboard when creating my maze. For full disclosure, I didn't just make a maze: I made an entire maze loader.

I based my program off of `sketch_4_Wall_Physics.pde` by Steve Ding and Colin Gallacher. 

#### The maze file design

I wanted to be able to create a maze visually in a text file instead of having to think about wall placement in the code itself.

I decided to make the first line represent the width and height of the maze so I could do a simple "eligibility" check within my program. If the maze dimensions don't match what the program expects, my program throws a custom error (described below).

The rest of the maze text file is a visual representation of the maze:

| **=** | represents a maze border and is ignored by my program
| **\-** | represents a horizontal wall
| **\|** | represents a vertical wall
| **\+** | represents the starting position of the player token
| **x** | represents the finish

```
30 15
==============================
=            |+              =
=  -----   -----  ------  |  =
=      |                  |  =
=----  ------  ------  ----  =
=              |        |    =
=  |------|  |---  ---  |  --=
=  |      |  |      |   |    =
=  |  --  |     |      ----  =
=      |  |------------|     =
=----  |  |      |     |  ---=
=      |  |  --  |  |  |     =
=  --------  |   |  |  |-----=
=            |      |       x=
==============================

```
{% include figure caption="_The maze I came up with._" %}

#### Checking maze dimensions

I realized that the size of the displayed maze was represented by the equations:

> world width * pixels per centimeter = screen width

and 

> world height * pixels per centimeter = screen height

When loading in a maze text file, I do a simple check to make sure the dimensions given in the first line of the file times `pixelsPerCentimeter` equal the screen dimensions. If not, I throw a custom exception:

```java
class incorrectMazeDimensionsException extends Exception{
    incorrectMazeDimensionsException(
			float expectedW, float expectedH, 
			int actualW, int actualH){
        super("Incorrect maze dimensions! Expected maze of " 
              + expectedW + " width and "
              + expectedH + " height but received maze of "
              + actualW + " width and "
              + actualH + " height");
    }
}
```
{% include figure caption="_My custom exception, incorrectMazeDimensionsException._" %}

#### Representing walls internally

I created a class for Wall objects to store basic information like dimensions, location, and color.

```java
public class Wall {
  private float w; // wall width
  private float h; // wall height
  private float x; // x position of top left corner
  private float y; // y position of top left corner
  private int c;   // color
  
  public Wall(float w, float h, float x, float y, int c){
    this.w = w;
    this.h = h;
    this.x = x;
    this.y = y;
    this.c = c;
  }
  
  public float getW(){
    return this.w;
  }
  
  public float getH(){
    return this.h;
  }
  
  public float getX(){
    return this.x;
  }
  
  public float getY(){
    return this.y;
  }
  
  public int getColor(){
    return this.c;
  }
  
}
```
{% include figure caption="_My Wall class._" %}

#### Parsing the text file

I created a text file parser to read through the maze text file that creates the player token, the finish objective, and Wall objects that are added to an ArrayList called `wallList`. I used inspiration from `sketch_6_Maze_Physics.pde` by Elie Hymowitz, Steve Ding, and Colin Gallacher to create the player token and finish markers.

```java
ArrayList<Wall> parseTextFile() throws incorrectMazeDimensionsException {
  wallList = new ArrayList<Wall>();
  Wall w;
  
     String[] lines = loadStrings(FILENAME);
     
     if( lines == null){
       throw new NullPointerException(
			"There is an error with your file!");
     }
     
     String line = lines[0]; // height and width of maze
     String[] mazeWH = line.split(" ");
     int mazeW = Integer.parseInt(mazeWH[0]);
     int mazeH = Integer.parseInt(mazeWH[1]);
     
     if(mazeW != worldWidth || mazeH != worldHeight){
       throw new incorrectMazeDimensionsException(
			worldWidth, worldHeight, mazeW, mazeH);
     }
     
     Character c;
     
     for(int i = 1; i < mazeH+1; i++){ // walls of maze
       line = lines[i];
       for(int j = 0; j < mazeW-1; j++){
         c = line.charAt(j);
         if (c == '-'){
           wallList.add(new Wall(1.25, 0.75, 
		edgeTopLeftX+j+0.5, edgeTopLeftY+i-0.5,
		 0x000000));
         }
         
         else if (c == '|'){
           wallList.add(new Wall(0.75, 1.25, 
		edgeTopLeftX+j+0.5, edgeTopLeftY+i-0.5,
		 0x000000));
         }
         else if (c == 'x'){
           createMazeEnd(edgeTopLeftX+j+0.5, 
		edgeTopLeftY+i-0.5);
         }
         else if (c == '+'){
           createPlayerToken(edgeTopLeftX+j+0.5,
		 edgeTopLeftY+i-0.5);
         }
       }
       if (PRINTMAZE) {
         System.out.println(line);
       }
     }
  
  return wallList;
}
```
{% include figure caption="_My maze text file parser._" %}

#### Creating the maze

Finally, I created a function that loops through `wallList` actually creates the maze.


```java
void createMaze(ArrayList<Wall> wallList) throws 
			incorrectMazeDimensionsException{
  
  FBox wall;
  for(Wall item : wallList){
    /* creation of wall */
    wall = new FBox(item.getW(), item.getH());
    wall.setPosition(item.getX(), item.getY());
    wall.setStatic(true);
    int c = item.getColor();
    wall.setFill(c);
    world.add(wall);
  }
}
```
{% include figure caption="_My maze creation loop._" %}

#### The full code base

The full code base can be found (here on Github)[https://github.com/linneakirby/canhaplabs/tree/main/lab2].

### The finished product

When run with my maze text file, I get a maze that looks like this:

{% include figure image_path="/assets/lab2/maze-start.png" alt="Layout of my maze." caption="_My maze layout._" %}

Upon reaching the finish marker, the player token will trigger an obnoxious effect:

{% include figure image_path="/assets/lab2/maze-finish.gif" alt="Reaching the end of my maze triggers an obnoxious display of flying colorful exclamation marks." caption="_My maze's obnoxious effect when reaching the finish marker._" %}

I originally intended to display a simple "Congratulations!" message, but I lucked into this nauseating effect and liked it so much I decided to keep it.

The full experience:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/7onDj6SEUXA" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

### Final thoughts

I thoroughly enjoyed this lab. I had never experienced this kind of haptic feedback before and had a blast trying out all the examples. I also hadn't had a chance to play around with a simple game in a while (and I absolutely adore solving puzzles and coming up with algorithms) so I got engrossed in creating my maze loader.

I had my partner and my mom try out my maze, but I don't think they were as enthralled as I am. I think their lack of reaction is due to the haptic feedback not being the focus of this project. In fact, my mom didn't even experience the feedback at first; she didn't bump into any walls until I explicitly instructed her to because, "I guess I'm just too good at the maze!"

I'm definitely looking forward to the next lab and playing with different types of feedback and seeing if I can get a bit more of a response out of people.